Added blog post on deploying an API (#610)
apisyouwonthate/apisyouwonthate.com: src/content/blog/how-to-build-and-deploy-an-api.mdx

---

> title: How to build and deploy an API

Reviewer: I think we can go with something more attention grabbing here - without being clickbaity. There's lots of great info in here about using new/modern/simple tooling to set up an API that doesn't require a squad of engineers, architects, and testers to get done.

How do you feel about:

"Not your grandad's REST - modern tools for building APIs"

or 

"Hitting the ground running with modern API tools"

or something along those lines?

> title: How to build and deploy an API

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: Modern deployment options for your API that's not a $5 GoDaddy VPS
```

subtitle: >-

>   Not sure what to put here?

Reviewer: Ideally this should be the elevator pitch for your post. In ~150char or so, what does the reader stand to gain from reading?

Maybe something like:
> Creating an API for your backend doesn't need to be complicated. Let's explore some options for bootstrapping an API using modern tools.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Creating an API for your backend doesn't need to be complicated. Let's explore some options for bootstrapping an API using modern tools.
```

date: "2022-04-06"
coverImage: planning-api.jpeg
type: blog
author: Alexander Karan
---

How do you deploy your API, and what's the best way to structure it? Front-end frameworks have come a long way in recent years, making it easy to spin up and deploy a website/web app. However, I find the noise caused by many strong opinions sometimes clouds the equal and fantastic progress made on letting developers quickly deploy an API. I'm going to cover a few ways you can build and deploy an API to get your MVP into the hands of your users as quickly as possible. I will approach these deployments from the mindset of building a REST API, as I find this is the most accessible format when thinking about structure and deployments.

## Don't build one from scratch

> Getting features, demos, and MVPs into users' hands is more important than the tech stack, language or processes you use. Users don't care how you built it; they care about the features and how well it works. Firebase has come on in leaps and bounds over the last few years and allows you to knock together a backend for your API quickly. Time and time again, I see people building out an API for simple CRUD operations. Don't make your life difficult. Why build and maintain a whole backend for simple operations? Firebase also allows for a more complex setup giving you the ability to write cloud functions that react and run code based on data changes in the database made by your front-end. If you're looking for an open-source alternative to Firebase, Supabase is a great companion. Plus, they have a great tag line: `Create a backend in less than 2 minutes.`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Getting features, demos, and MVPs into users' hands is more important than the tech stack, language or processes you use. Users don't care how you built it; they care about the features and how well it works. [Firebase](https://firebase.google.com/) has come on in leaps and bounds over the last few years and allows you to knock together a backend for your API quickly. Time and time again, I see people building out an API for simple CRUD operations. Don't make your life difficult. Why build and maintain a whole backend for simple operations? Firebase also allows for a more complex setup giving you the ability to write cloud functions which respond to changes, and run code based on data changes in the database made by your front-end. If you're looking for an open-source alternative to Firebase, [Supabase](https://supabase.com/) is a great companion. Plus, they have a great tag line: `Create a backend in less than 2 minutes.`
```

> Another tool to deploy backends with hardly any code is AWS Amplify. You are given tools for authentication and data storage, serving web pages, and connecting to other AWS services. Amplify also comes with a nifty setup they call Studio, allowing you to manage app users and edit content. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another tool to deploy backends with hardly any code is [AWS Amplify](https://aws.amazon.com/amplify/). You are given tools for authentication and data storage, serving web pages, and connecting to other AWS services. Amplify also comes with a nifty setup they call Studio, allowing you to manage app users and edit content. 
```

There are some great tools out there for putting together backends. Managing dev ops, servers, and other backend infrastructure can be a pain sometimes. Assess if there is a need to put together a full-fledge backend/API before starting. We don't all need to be Stripe 😉

## Deploy on the Edge 

Edge computing has me excited; so many cool things are happening in this space. Deploying an API on edge is like writing serverless functions, with the main difference being you deploy to the edge network, and they tend to run on top of the V8 JavaScript runtime. I love this approach as you get to write endpoints as functions and forget about everything else. 

> There are a few providers in this space. One of the most notable is Cloudflare Workers, and you can write in Rust, C, and C++, not just JavaScript. They have some great examples of starter projects to get you going,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are a few providers in this space. One of the most notable is [Cloudflare Workers](https://workers.cloudflare.com/), and you can write in Rust, C, and C++, not just JavaScript. They have some great examples of starter projects to get you going,
```

> They also have an excellent course on building a serverless API with Cloudflare Workers on EggHead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They also have an excellent course on [building a serverless API with Cloudflare Workers on EggHead](https://egghead.io/courses/build-a-serverless-api-with-cloudflare-workers-d67ca551).
```

> However, I love Deno Deploy, a one-click deploy service for Deno. It allows you to instantly deploy JavaScript on the edge every time you push code to Github. Forget servers, forget vendor lock-in and push JavaScript all the livelong day.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I also love [Deno Deploy](https://deno.com/deploy), a one-click deploy service for [Deno](https://deno.land/). It allows you to instantly deploy JavaScript on the edge every time you push code to Github. Forget servers, forget vendor lock-in and push JavaScript all the livelong day.
```

> Let me give you an example of how easy it is to deploy a Rest API. I have set up a single route using Oak (an HTTP framework for Deno) that returns an estimated carbon footprint for the provided electricity consumption. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is an example of how simple it can be to deploy a Rest API. I have set up a single route using [Oak](https://oakserver.github.io/oak/) (an HTTP framework for Deno) that returns an estimated carbon footprint for the provided electricity consumption. 
```

Added a link, and changed easy to simple - generally we try to avoid weighing in on how easy/hard something is, so we're not making assumptions about how deep the reader's technical background is

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```js
```

this should add syntax highlighting

You can check out my demo API in full here.

Change the query to your electricity consumption in kWh to get your estimated footprint. 

The question of how to structure your projects is the next hurdle, and this is where breaking them down into microservices would be essential. For example, for this project, I could point to a subdomain, "calculator.alexanderkaran.com", and build out more functionality for working out the footprint for gas or water usage. Each function could be at a different subroute, i.e. "/gas" or "/water"; however, If I wanted to build functionality for testing appliance efficiency. I would create this as a whole new project and point a new subdomain at it, for example, "appliances.alexanderkaran.com". 

Another great part of Deno Deploy is keeping all the services in one repo is easy; you point each project to a specific folder only the code imported in that folder gets deployed. Deno and Deno Deploy make it easy to share code, create a shared folder in the mono-repo and import the code; that's it, no third party sharing system and no private npm modules.

## Serverless Functions

> Serverless functions share a lot with edge functions, but you usually code in Node rather than a V8 browser runtime. However, they can have a cold start, meaning the code does not run the second it's called, unlike edge functions which happen straight away. Many providers offer serverless functions, but we will focus on AWS Lambda as it is one of the most common. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Serverless functions share a lot with edge functions, but you usually code in Node rather than a V8 browser runtime. However, they can have a cold start, meaning the code does not run the second it's called, unlike edge functions which happen straight away. Many providers offer serverless functions, but we will focus on [AWS Lambda](https://aws.amazon.com/lambda/) as it is one of the most common. 
```

> Lambda functions are used for many different solutions, but they need to be paired with an API Gateway when building an API. It turns out AWS have a service for that, too 😉. When creating Lambda functions in the AWS console, they offer options to connect an endpoint in a new or existing API Gateway, making setup a breeze. If you are used to building monoliths and everything in one place, this can seem confusing. However, it simply boils down to your API Gateway containing all your routes, and each Lambda function is the controller for the route.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lambda functions are used for many different solutions, but they need to be paired with an API Gateway when building an API. It turns out AWS have a service for that, too 😉. When creating Lambda functions in the AWS console, they offer options to connect an endpoint in a new or existing [API Gateway](https://aws.amazon.com/api-gateway/), making setup a breeze. If you are used to building monoliths and everything in one place, this can seem confusing. However, it simply boils down to your API Gateway containing all your routes, and each Lambda function is the controller for the route.
```

> Before we dive deeper into how this works, let's look at how Lambda functions are structured. I have stolen one of the AWS HTTP templates for updating DynamoDB:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before we dive deeper into how this works, let's look at how Lambda functions are structured. I have stolen one of the AWS HTTP templates for updating [DynamoDB](https://aws.amazon.com/dynamodb/):
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```js
```

                break;
            case 'POST':
                body = await dynamo.put(JSON.parse(event.body)).promise();
                break;
            case 'PUT':
                body = await dynamo.update(JSON.parse(event.body)).promise();
                break;
            default:
                throw new Error(`Unsupported method "${event.httpMethod}"`);
        }
    } catch (err) {
        statusCode = '400';
        body = err.message;
    } finally {
        body = JSON.stringify(body);
    }

    return {
        statusCode,
        body,
        headers,
    };
};
``` 

[AWS Lambda Snippet](https://gist.github.com/AlexanderKaran/666d7a80e92b7f87c4f81f47211a6145)

As you see here, the function responded to an event and accessed the HTTP method inside to see what type of request it was. Personally, the biggest hurdle I had when using serverless functions or edge computing was how there were no req, res and next functions like I was used to in ExpressJS. Thankfully, though, there are many ways to import frameworks you're used to into Lambda. You also do not have to code in Node; other languages such as Python and Java are on offer too.

> Setting up serverless functions with an API Gateway can be done super quickly using the AWS console, but a more extensive API with many endpoints would be time-consuming to set this up way. Enter tools like ClaudiaJS and Serverless.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Setting up serverless functions with an API Gateway can be done super quickly using the AWS console, but a more extensive API with many endpoints would be time-consuming to set this up way. Enter tools like [ClaudiaJS](https://www.claudiajs.com/) and [Serverless](https://www.serverless.com/).
```

After setting up your Cluster, you connect it to the outside world in a few different ways. One approach is to connect it to an Application Load Balancer and set up rules in Load Balancer to connect different URL routes to each service. I usually have a few services running in a cluster. For example, my last Cluster contained the following services:

**Measure Service:**
My service for handling carbon calculations and tracking consumption and cost of utilities. It was connected to the load balancer, and any request that came through "myapi.com/measure" was sent here.

**Image Service:**
My service for handling image uploads and processing. It was connected to the load balancer, and any request that came through "myapi.com/image" was sent here.

**Notifications Service:**
The service for sending emails and push notifications but not connected to the Load Balancer. The other services can call it as they're all on the same VPC (Virtual Private Network), which means I did not need to write the same notification code in the Image or Measure Service.

AWS has some overviews on setting up ECS and what you can connect it to.

> If you are looking for a more in-depth tutorial on deploying a Node app from scratch, you can check out this tutorial by Raphael.

Reviewer: Looks like a link is missing here
